.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 The Hobby OS Project
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt INTRO 9
.Os style9-os
.
.Sh NAME
.Nm intro
.Nd introduction to style9-os, a BSD-flavoured x86_64 kernel with Mach IPC
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm style9-os
is a hobby kernel for the long-mode x86_64.
It boots via PVH
.Pq QEMU Sy -kernel No on an ELF64
or Multiboot 1/2, runs preemptive multitasking with Mach-style ports as
the only inter-task primitive, and ships a small ring-3 surface built
on top.
.Pp
The name is a play on
.Sy style(9) ,
the FreeBSD kernel style guide -- the project is an exercise in
applying that style discipline to a from-scratch tree.
.
.Sh SUBSYSTEMS
At a glance:
.Bl -tag -width "userspace"
.It Sy boot
PVH note + Multiboot 2 header in
.Pa arch/amd64/boot.S ;
identity-maps the low 1 GiB with 2 MiB huge pages and trampolines into
long mode.
.It Sy traps
48-vector IDT, trap-frame dispatcher, symbolicated panic on exception.
.It Sy memory
.Xr pmm 9
.Pq bitmap page allocator ,
.Xr kmem 9
.Pq power-of-two slabs with 0xFE red zones + 0xDE freelist poison ,
.Xr pmap 9
.Pq per-task page tables ,
.Xr vm_allocate 9
.Pq user-VA ranges .
.It Sy scheduling
Cooperative + preemptive round-robin with PIT @ 100 Hz; idle thread
reaps zombies; timed-waiter list backs
.Fn mach_msg_recv_timed .
.It Sy ipc
Mach ports
.Pq Xr port 9
with SEND / RECEIVE / SEND_ONCE rights, port sets, OOL bulk-memory
descriptors, and a synchronous-dispatcher fast path for kernel
services
.Pq Xr mach_msg 9 .
.It Sy services
.Em clock ,
.Em stats ,
.Em tasks ,
.Em echool
.Pq OOL exerciser ,
.Em klog ,
and
.Em man
.Pq this manual system .
Each is a kernel-resident
.Dv PORT_SPECIAL_SERVICE
port registered with bootstrap.
.It Sy drivers
PS/2 keyboard, COM1 UART, ATA disk -- each bridges its IRQ to a Mach
stream port via the
.Em dev/<name>
protocol.
.It Sy userspace
ring-3 programs are ELF64 binaries linked against
.Em libstyle9 ,
embedded in the kernel image via
.Sy objcopy
.Pq no on-disk filesystem yet ,
and registered in
.Pa kern/progreg.c .
The shell
.Pq Pa user/sh.c
is the default landing UI.
.It Sy diagnostics
Symbolicated panic, in-kernel debugger
.Pq Xr ddb 9 ,
WITNESS lock-order verifier
.Pq Xr witness 9 ,
KASSERT and
.Fn panic
.Pq Xr kassert 9 ,
14-test boot-time stress harness, on-host serial mirror.
.El
.
.Sh STYLE
Project-wide
.Sy style(9) :
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Sy SPDX-License-Identifier
header on every file.
.It
Function names at column 0, prototypes separate from definitions, tab
indentation, parenthesised returns:
.Sy return (expr);
.It
Per-struct field prefixes:
.Va p_
for
.Vt struct port ,
.Va th_
for
.Vt struct thread ,
.Va vme_
for
.Vt struct vm_map_entry ,
and so on.
.It
Lock-key annotations on shared struct fields:
.Sy (p)
protected,
.Sy (a)
atomic,
.Sy (c)
const after init,
.Sy (m)
protected by the per-struct lock.
.It
.Sy _Static_assert
on every wire-format struct so a layout drift fails the build, not the
first boot.
.It
.Sy KASSERT
on every invariant the code relies on but cannot encode in types.
.It
.Sy WIRE FORMAT.
banner comment on every ABI-stable struct so a wire change is impossible
to miss in review.
.It
Impersonal voice throughout: header comments describe what the surface
does, not what the writer thinks.
.El
.Pp
The full project-side bar-raising rules are recorded in commit
.Pa 4dd5d44
and the related memory entries.
.
.Sh BUILD AND RUN
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cd os
make            # build kernel.elf
make log        # boot headless, capture serial to obj/boot.log
make run        # boot interactive in QEMU
.Ed
.Pp
Or from the Windows host:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
\&.\\tools\\run.ps1
.Ed
.Pp
The host script launches QEMU with an interactive window and mirrors
COM1 to
.Pa serial.log
so a developer can drive the shell while another window tails the log.
.Pp
The kernel runs a 14-test stress pass at boot and then spawns
.Em hello.elf
as a ring-3 smoke test before handing off to
.Em sh.elf .
.
.Sh DESIGN
Loosely Mach-shape rather than BSD-shape:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Vt task
and
.Vt thread
are separate from day one; there is no
.Vt proc
that conflates them.
.It
Mach
.Em ports
are the universal IPC primitive.
There are no separate pipe, socket, or file descriptor abstractions
on top.
Even kernel-internal RPC uses
.Fn mach_msg_send
against
.Va kernel_space .
.It
Both input devices ship bytes over Mach: each driver IRQ pushes into a
ring, a per-driver kernel thread parks via
.Fn sched_post_irq_wake ,
and the shell receives on a port set whose members are
.Em dev/kbd
and
.Em dev/uart .
.It
The wire format matches real Mach in shape -- 24-byte header, 8-byte
port descriptor, 16-byte OOL descriptor, type-tag at byte 0 of every
descriptor -- so a future userspace built against
.Em mach.h
on a different host would be one library shim away.
.It
Kernel-side services use a single
.Dv PORT_SPECIAL_SERVICE
hook in
.Fn mach_msg_send :
the dispatcher runs synchronously in the sender's thread context and
the reply lands inline.
Same pattern Mach uses for
.Em task_port
and
.Em host_port .
.El
.
.Sh GETTING STARTED
After boot the shell prompts
.Sy $ .
Type
.Sy help
for the builtin list,
.Sy about
for live counters, or
.Sy man <topic>
to read this manual.
Programs in the registry
.Pq Em hello , clock , tasks
are reachable by name.
.Pp
Reading next:
.Bl -tag -width "vm_allocate(9)"
.It Xr port 9
the IPC primitive and its rights model.
.It Xr mach_msg 9
how to send, receive, and RPC.
.It Xr vm_allocate 9
how to obtain user-VA ranges and release them.
.It Xr kassert 9
the diagnostic philosophy and primitives.
.El
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kassert 9 ,
.Xr mach_msg 9 ,
.Xr port 9 ,
.Xr style 9
.Pq the FreeBSD style guide this project is named after ,
.Xr vm_allocate 9
.
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm style9-os
boots, runs Mach IPC end-to-end from ring 3, and serves its own manual
since May 28, 2026.
.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An The style9-os project .
