.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 The Hobby OS Project
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt KASSERT 9
.Os style9-os
.
.Sh NAME
.Nm KASSERT ,
.Nm panic ,
.Nm kassert_fail ,
.Nm panic_in_progress
.Nd kernel invariant and unrecoverable-fault primitives
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In panic.h
.Pp
.Fn KASSERT "expr" "const char *msg"
.Ft void
.Fn panic "const char *fmt" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn kassert_fail "const char *cond" "const char *file" "int line" "const char *msg"
.Ft void
.Fn backtrace_print "uintptr_t rbp" "int max_frames"
.Pp
.Ft "extern volatile bool"
.Va panic_in_progress ;
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm style9-os
ships three diagnostic primitives, ordered by severity:
.Bl -tag -width "kassert_fail"
.It Fn KASSERT cond msg
Compile-time-inlined invariant check.
If
.Fa cond
evaluates to zero the macro calls
.Fn kassert_fail
with the textual condition, the source file and line, and
.Fa msg ;
.Fn kassert_fail
prints the location and message, walks the frame-pointer chain to
emit a backtrace, and panics.
.It Fn panic fmt ...
Hard stop.
Emits the formatted message, walks the frame-pointer chain via
.Fn backtrace_print ,
sets
.Va panic_in_progress ,
and halts.
Marked
.Sy noreturn .
.It Fn backtrace_print rbp max_frames
Walk up to
.Fa max_frames
stack frames starting from the supplied RBP.
Each frame is symbolicated against
.Va __ksymtab .
The trap dispatcher passes the faulting context's RBP rather than the
dispatcher's own so the trace starts where the user wants it to.
.El
.
.Sh PHILOSOPHY
.Nm style9-os
follows the classic BSD bar: ship thousands of
.Fn KASSERT
calls.
One missed invariant in production is worth more than every
assertion's cycle cost.
.Pp
KASSERTs compile down to a CMP plus a conditional branch on the cold
path; the cost in the hot path is one byte and one tested flag.
The kernel is its own debug build -- KASSERT, WITNESS
.Pq Xr witness 9 ,
the kmem red zones, and the freelist poison ship in the same binary,
without an
.Sy DEBUG
gate.
.Pp
When in doubt, write the KASSERT.
.Em Wrong KASSERTs
get fixed the first time the kernel boots; missing ones can sit silent
for months and surface as inscrutable corruption.
.
.Sh WHEN TO USE EACH
.Bl -tag -width "kprintf"
.It Fn KASSERT cond msg
Any invariant the code relies on but cannot enforce via types.
Examples: this list is non-empty here; the holder field matches us; phys
is page-aligned; queue head equals tail iff size is zero; the state
machine is in the expected source state.
.It Fn panic fmt
Unrecoverable conditions that are not invariant violations: corrupt boot
info, missing required hardware, exhausted resource that the kernel
cannot fall back on
.Pq e.g. PMM out of pages during early bring-up .
.It Fn kprintf fmt
.Pq Xr kprintf 9
One-shot diagnostic prints from a working code path.
Not for
.Dq noisy normal :
rate-limit at the source, or expose a counter that
.Xr ddb 9
can dump on demand.
.El
.Pp
There is no
.Fn kwarn ,
.Fn printf_once ,
or rate-limited logger.
If a path is suspicious enough to log, it is suspicious enough to either
KASSERT or to be reported via a one-shot bring-up banner.
.
.Sh PANIC PATH MODULES
Modules that may run on the panic path
.Pq Xr tty 9 , Xr dbgcon 9 , Xr uart 9
consult
.Va panic_in_progress
and bypass any synchronisation that would otherwise self-deadlock
against an outer caller already holding the relevant lock.
Pattern:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if (panic_in_progress) {
	/* unlocked fast path -- just emit the byte */
} else {
	spin_lock(&tty_lock);
	/* ... */
	spin_unlock(&tty_lock);
}
.Ed
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Pre-condition check at the top of a function:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
void
list_push(struct list *l, struct item *it)
{
	KASSERT(l != NULL, "null list");
	KASSERT(it != NULL, "null item");
	KASSERT(it->next == NULL, "item already linked");
	it->next = l->head;
	l->head = it;
}
.Ed
.Pp
State-machine transition guard:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
KASSERT(t->th_state == TH_RUNNING,
    "transition out of RUNNING from wrong state");
t->th_state = TH_BLOCKED;
.Ed
.Pp
Unrecoverable resource exhaustion at boot:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kernel_task = task_create("kernel");
if (kernel_task == NULL)
	panic("task_subsystem_init: kernel_task allocation failed");
.Ed
.
.Sh ANTI-PATTERNS
.Bl -tag -width "if (DEBUG)"
.It Sy if (DEBUG) KASSERT(...)
KASSERTs are unconditional in
.Nm style9-os .
Do not gate them.
.It Sy KASSERT on user-supplied input
KASSERT is for invariants the kernel maintains, not for things the
caller could violate.
A user pointer outside the user-VA window is checked with
.Fn user_range_ok
and returns
.Dv SYS_E_FAULT ;
it is not a KASSERT.
.It Sy panic on recoverable failure
.Fn kmalloc
returning
.Dv NULL
on a runtime path is recoverable: return the appropriate per-subsystem
error
.Pq Dv MACH_E_NOMEM , Dv SYS_E_NOMEM .
Panicking on every allocation failure makes the kernel fragile.
.It Sy KASSERT on a slow predicate
The KASSERT is on the hot path; the predicate must be O(1).
.Dq Validate the entire vm_map for consistency
is not a KASSERT, it is a
.Xr ddb 9
command.
.El
.
.Sh OUTPUT FORMAT
A
.Fn KASSERT
failure produces:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
KASSERT failed:
  cond  cur->vme_end > cur->vme_start
  file  kern/vm.c:218
  msg   vm_map_entry has zero extent
panic: assertion
[ 0] panic+0x4a
[ 1] kassert_fail+0x2c
[ 2] vm_map_remove+0xb1
[ 3] sys_vm_deallocate+0x55
[ 4] syscall_dispatch+0x9e
[ 5] syscall_entry+0x21
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn panic
produces the same trailing backtrace with the formatted panic message
in place of the KASSERT block.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ddb 9 ,
.Xr kprintf 9 ,
.Xr witness 9
.
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn KASSERT
and
.Fn panic
have been part of
.Nm style9-os
since the debug-infrastructure arc landed on May 27, 2026.
.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An The style9-os project .
