.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 The Hobby OS Project
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt MACH_MSG 9
.Os style9-os
.
.Sh NAME
.Nm mach_msg_send ,
.Nm mach_msg_recv ,
.Nm mach_msg_recv_timed ,
.Nm mach_msg_rpc
.Nd transfer Mach messages between port spaces
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In style9.h
.Pp
.Ft int
.Fn mach_msg_send "const struct mach_msg_header *msg"
.Ft int
.Fn mach_msg_recv "mach_port_name_t name" "struct mach_msg_header *buf" "size_t buf_size"
.Ft int
.Fn mach_msg_recv_timed "mach_port_name_t name" "struct mach_msg_header *buf" "size_t buf_size" "uint64_t timeout_ms"
.Ft int
.Fn mach_msg_rpc "struct mach_msg_header *req" "struct mach_msg_header *reply" "size_t reply_size" "uint64_t timeout_ms"
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm mach_msg
family ships messages between Mach
.Em port spaces .
Every task carries one port space; the well-known names
.Dv MACH_PORT_TASK_SELF
and
.Dv MACH_PORT_BOOTSTRAP
are populated at task creation.
See
.Xr port 9
for the wire format and the underlying rights model.
.Pp
.Fn mach_msg_send
copies the header and body addressed by
.Fa msg
into a kernel-side message, validates and translates every descriptor,
and either queues the message at the destination port or hands it
synchronously to the port's special-port dispatcher.
.Pp
.Fn mach_msg_recv
blocks until a message is available at
.Fa name
.Pq a Dv RECEIVE Ns "-rights" name or a port-set name ,
then copies header + body into
.Fa buf .
The receive translates every descriptor: port descriptors land at fresh
names in the receiver's space; OOL descriptors land at fresh user-VA
ranges installed in the receiver's
.Em vm_map
.Pq see Xr vm_allocate 9 .
.Pp
.Fn mach_msg_recv_timed
is the same primitive bounded by
.Fa timeout_ms
milliseconds.
A timeout of
.Dv MACH_TIMEOUT_NONE
.Pq zero
makes the call a non-blocking poll;
.Dv MACH_TIMEOUT_FOREVER
makes it identical to
.Fn mach_msg_recv .
.Pp
.Fn mach_msg_rpc
is the convenience wrapper for request/reply round-trips: the kernel
allocates a fresh reply port, splices it into
.Fa req Ns 's
.Va msgh_local
.Pq preserving Dv MACH_MSGH_BITS_COMPLEX No so body descriptors survive ,
sends, receives the reply into
.Fa reply
with a
.Fa timeout_ms
bound, and deallocates the reply port before returning.
Special-port destinations
.Pq task_self, bootstrap, kernel services
short-circuit the queue and reply synchronously into the caller's
reply buffer.
.
.Sh MESSAGE STRUCTURE
The minimum send is a bare header:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct mach_msg_header {
    uint32_t          msgh_bits;
    uint32_t          msgh_size;
    mach_port_name_t  msgh_remote;
    mach_port_name_t  msgh_local;
    uint32_t          msgh_voucher;
    uint32_t          msgh_id;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Va msgh_bits
encodes the disposition of the remote (destination) and local
.Pq reply
names: the low byte holds the remote disposition, the next byte the
local; the high bit is
.Dv MACH_MSGH_BITS_COMPLEX
and indicates a body follows.
.Pp
A complex message follows the header with a
.Vt mach_msg_body
.Pq one uint32_t descriptor count
then a variable-stride descriptor area.
Byte 0 of every descriptor is the type tag
.Pq Dv MACH_MSG_PORT_DESCRIPTOR No or Dv MACH_MSG_OOL_DESCRIPTOR ;
the walker dispatches on it and advances by the descriptor's size.
.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
A send to a port tagged
.Em special
.Pq task_self, bootstrap, or any Dv PORT_SPECIAL_SERVICE No port
does not queue: the kernel runs the per-tag dispatcher synchronously
in the sender's thread context, and the reply is delivered to
.Va msgh_local
inline.
.Fn mach_msg_rpc
exploits this to avoid an enqueue + scheduler hop for the common
case of
.Dq ask a kernel service a question and get an answer .
.Pp
OOL descriptors carry bulk memory.
On send, the kernel copies the sender's bytes into a kmalloc'd
staging buffer; on recv, fresh frames are allocated and the staging
bytes are materialised at a fresh receiver-side VA range.
The
.Em deallocate
bit on the descriptor asks the kernel to
.Fn vm_map_release
the sender's source range after the copy
.Pq see Xr vm_allocate 9 .
.Pp
Port descriptors carry capabilities.
A
.Dv MAKE_SEND
disposition on a name the sender holds
.Dv RECEIVE
on creates a fresh
.Dv SEND
right in the receiver's space; a
.Dv MOVE_RECEIVE
transfers the
.Dv RECEIVE
right so the original sender keeps only a
.Dv SEND
back.
The full disposition table lives in
.Xr port 9 .
.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
All four functions return
.Dv MACH_MSG_OK
on success, or a negative
.Dv MACH_E_*
code on failure.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Lookup a service and call into it:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mach_port_name_t svc = bootstrap_lookup("clock");
if (svc == MACH_PORT_NULL)
	return MACH_E_NAME;

struct {
	struct mach_msg_header	hdr;
} req;
struct {
	struct mach_msg_header	hdr;
	struct svc_clock_reply	body;
} reply;

req.hdr.msgh_bits	= MACH_MSGH_BITS(MACH_MSG_TYPE_COPY_SEND, 0);
req.hdr.msgh_size	= sizeof(req);
req.hdr.msgh_remote	= svc;
req.hdr.msgh_local	= MACH_PORT_NULL;
req.hdr.msgh_voucher	= 0;
req.hdr.msgh_id		= CLOCK_OP_GET;

int rv = mach_msg_rpc(&req.hdr, &reply.hdr, sizeof(reply), 1000);
(void)mach_port_deallocate(svc);
if (rv == MACH_MSG_OK)
	printf("uptime %llu ms\\n", reply.body.cr_uptime_ms);
.Ed
.Pp
Non-blocking poll for a notification:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct mach_msg_header note;
int rv = mach_msg_recv_timed(notify_port, &note, sizeof(note), 0);
if (rv == MACH_E_TIMEOUT)
	/* no message right now */;
.Ed
.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width "MACH_E_TOOSMALL"
.It Dv MACH_E_INVAL
malformed header or body
.Pq bad size, bad descriptor type, descriptor area larger than the message size .
.It Dv MACH_E_NAME
.Fa msgh_remote ,
.Fa msgh_local ,
or
.Fa name
does not exist in the caller's port space.
.It Dv MACH_E_RIGHT
the named name exists but does not carry the right the operation needs
.Pq e.g. Dv RECEIVE No required, only Dv SEND No present .
.It Dv MACH_E_DEAD
the destination port has been destroyed.
.It Dv MACH_E_NOSPACE
the destination's queue is full and the send did not wait, or the
caller's name table is full.
.It Dv MACH_E_NOMSG
.Fn mach_msg_recv
called on an empty queue with no waiter slot available
.Pq Fn mach_msg_recv_block No blocks instead .
.It Dv MACH_E_TOOSMALL
.Fa buf_size
.Pq or Fa reply_size
is smaller than the message the kernel wants to deliver.
.It Dv MACH_E_NOMEM
kmalloc failed during message copy-in.
.It Dv MACH_E_TIMEOUT
.Fn mach_msg_recv_timed
or
.Fn mach_msg_rpc
expired before a message arrived.
.El
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr port 9 ,
.Xr vm_allocate 9
.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm mach_msg
surface has been part of
.Nm style9-os
since the Mach IPC bring-up.
OOL descriptors with the
.Em deallocate
bit landed on May 28, 2026.
.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An The style9-os project .
