.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 The Hobby OS Project
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt PORT 9
.Os style9-os
.
.Sh NAME
.Nm port ,
.Nm port_space ,
.Nm port_allocate ,
.Nm port_deallocate ,
.Nm port_set_allocate ,
.Nm port_set_insert ,
.Nm port_set_remove ,
.Nm port_mod_refs ,
.Nm mach_msg_send ,
.Nm mach_msg_recv ,
.Nm mach_msg_recv_block ,
.Nm mach_msg_recv_timed ,
.Nm mach_msg_rpc
.Nd Mach-flavoured inter-task IPC primitives
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In port.h
.Pp
Lifecycle:
.Ft "struct port_space *"
.Fn port_space_new "void"
.Ft void
.Fn port_space_destroy "struct port_space *space"
.Pp
Rights:
.Ft mach_port_name_t
.Fn port_allocate "struct port_space *space" "uint8_t right_mask"
.Ft int
.Fn port_deallocate "struct port_space *space" "mach_port_name_t name"
.Ft int
.Fn port_mod_refs "struct port_space *space" "mach_port_name_t name" "uint8_t right"
.Pp
Port sets:
.Ft mach_port_name_t
.Fn port_set_allocate "struct port_space *space"
.Ft int
.Fn port_set_insert "struct port_space *space" "mach_port_name_t set" "mach_port_name_t port"
.Ft int
.Fn port_set_remove "struct port_space *space" "mach_port_name_t set" "mach_port_name_t port"
.Pp
Send and receive:
.Ft int
.Fn mach_msg_send "struct port_space *from" "const struct mach_msg_header *msg"
.Ft int
.Fn mach_msg_recv "struct port_space *to" "mach_port_name_t recv_name" "struct mach_msg_header *buf" "size_t buf_size"
.Ft int
.Fn mach_msg_recv_block "struct port_space *to" "mach_port_name_t recv_name" "struct mach_msg_header *buf" "size_t buf_size"
.Ft int
.Fn mach_msg_recv_timed "struct port_space *to" "mach_port_name_t recv_name" "struct mach_msg_header *buf" "size_t buf_size" "uint64_t timeout_ms"
.Ft int
.Fn mach_msg_rpc "struct port_space *space" "struct mach_msg_header *req" "struct mach_msg_header *reply_buf" "size_t reply_buf_size" "uint64_t timeout_ms"
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Em port
is a kernel object holding a FIFO of in-flight messages, an optional
single
.Dv RECEIVE
right, and any number of
.Dv SEND
rights.
A
.Em port space
is a per-task table mapping integer
.Em names
to port rights; names are local to the space, so task A's name 5 and
task B's name 5 may refer to completely different ports.
.Pp
Each task carries one port space.
The kernel itself owns the well-known space
.Va kernel_space ,
through which all kernel-resident services and driver threads
communicate.
A task created with
.Xr task_create 9
already has two well-known names installed by the time its first thread
runs:
.Dv MACH_PORT_TASK_SELF
.Pq Sy 1 ,
a
.Dv SEND
right to its task-self port, and
.Dv MACH_PORT_BOOTSTRAP
.Pq Sy 2 ,
a
.Dv SEND
right to the global bootstrap port.
.
.Ss Rights
A name in a port space carries any combination of the bits below,
OR-masked together:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv MACH_PORT_RIGHT_RECEIVE Pq 0x01
The holder dequeues messages from the port and is the sole
consumer.
At most one name in the entire system holds the receive right for any
given port.
.It Dv MACH_PORT_RIGHT_SEND Pq 0x02
The holder may enqueue messages on the port.
Any number of names may hold this right at once.
.It Dv MACH_PORT_RIGHT_SEND_ONCE Pq 0x04
A
.Dv SEND
right that vanishes after one message is enqueued through it.
Used for reply ports in RPC: the caller hands the server a one-shot
SEND so the server can reply exactly once and never again.
.It Dv MACH_PORT_RIGHT_PORT_SET Pq 0x08
The name refers to a port-set aggregator, not a port; see
.Sx Port sets .
.El
.Pp
.Fn port_allocate
creates a fresh port and installs the requested combination of rights
under a newly-allocated name in
.Fa space .
The typical idiom for a service is
.Bd -literal -offset indent
n = port_allocate(space,
    MACH_PORT_RIGHT_RECEIVE | MACH_PORT_RIGHT_SEND);
.Ed
.Pp
which yields a name suitable for both serving (the
.Dv RECEIVE
right is needed to dequeue) and self-send (the
.Dv SEND
right makes the name usable as the destination of an outgoing message).
.Pp
.Fn port_deallocate
removes the name entirely, releasing every right the entry holds.
When the last receive right on a port is dropped the port itself is
destroyed and any in-flight messages are drained.
.Fn port_mod_refs
drops a single right kind from a name without taking down the others:
useful for "the last sender disconnected" tests that need the port to
become dead while a receiver is still parked.
.
.Ss Port sets
A port set aggregates several ports' receive queues behind a single
name, allowing one server thread to service many endpoints from one
.Fn mach_msg_recv .
Port sets are receive-only: there is no
.Dv SEND
right on a set itself; senders address individual member ports.
.Pp
.Fn port_set_allocate
creates an empty set.
.Fn port_set_insert
moves a port from standalone into a set; a port may belong to at most
one set.
.Fn port_set_remove
detaches a port back to standalone.
.
.Ss Messages
Every message starts with a 24-byte
.Vt mach_msg_header :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct mach_msg_header {
    uint32_t          msgh_bits;
    uint32_t          msgh_size;     /* total bytes incl. header */
    mach_port_name_t  msgh_remote;   /* dest name (sender NS)    */
    mach_port_name_t  msgh_local;    /* reply name (sender NS)   */
    uint32_t          msgh_voucher;  /* reserved, set 0          */
    uint32_t          msgh_id;       /* protocol op code         */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The low two bytes of
.Va msgh_bits
carry the dispositions for
.Va msgh_remote
and
.Va msgh_local
respectively (see
.Sx Dispositions ) ;
bit 31
.Pq Dv MACH_MSGH_BITS_COMPLEX
indicates that a
.Vt mach_msg_body
plus zero or more descriptors follow the header.
.Pp
.Va msgh_size
is the total in-message byte count including header, body, descriptors,
and any inline payload.
.Va msgh_id
is opaque to the kernel: protocols define their own op codes.
.Pq Dv TASK_OP_GET_INFO , Dv BOOTSTRAP_OP_LOOKUP , Dv DEV_OP_*
are examples.
.
.Ss Dispositions
A disposition byte tells the kernel what to do with the right named
in the corresponding slot at send or receive time:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Dv MACH_MSG_TYPE_MOVE_RECEIVE Pq 16
The sender transfers its receive right to the receiver.
.It Dv MACH_MSG_TYPE_MOVE_SEND Pq 17
The sender transfers a send right.
.It Dv MACH_MSG_TYPE_MOVE_SEND_ONCE Pq 18
The sender transfers a send-once right.
.It Dv MACH_MSG_TYPE_COPY_SEND Pq 19
The sender keeps the send right; the receiver acquires a fresh send
right to the same port.
.It Dv MACH_MSG_TYPE_MAKE_SEND Pq 20
The sender holds receive and synthesises a send right for delivery.
.It Dv MACH_MSG_TYPE_MAKE_SEND_ONCE Pq 21
Like
.Dv MAKE_SEND
but produces a send-once right.
.El
.
.Ss Descriptors
When
.Dv MACH_MSGH_BITS_COMPLEX
is set, a
.Vt mach_msg_body
follows the header:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct mach_msg_body {
    uint32_t  msgh_descriptor_count;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Va msgh_descriptor_count
descriptors follow the body, each one of:
.Bl -tag -width "MACH_MSG_OOL_DESCRIPTOR"
.It Dv MACH_MSG_PORT_DESCRIPTOR Pq 0
An 8-byte
.Vt mach_msg_port_descriptor
naming a port right; the disposition byte at offset 1 controls
copy/move semantics on send.
.It Dv MACH_MSG_OOL_DESCRIPTOR Pq 1
A 16-byte
.Vt mach_msg_ool_descriptor
naming a sender VA range to ferry to the receiver out-of-line.
On send the kernel kmallocs a staging buffer and copies the bytes; on
receive it allocates fresh frames in the receiver's pmap, copies the
bytes in, records the range in the receiver's
.Xr vm_map 9 ,
and patches the descriptor's
.Va address
field to the new receiver VA.
The
.Va deallocate
field is reserved
.Pq must be 0
until backing
.Xr vm_allocate 9
exists.
.El
.Pp
The descriptor area is
.Em variable-stride :
the parser reads byte 0 of every descriptor as its type tag, dispatches
on size
.Pq 8 No or Sy 16 ,
and advances.
Port and OOL descriptors may be freely interleaved in the same message.
.Pp
A virtual-copy
.Pq Dv MACH_MSG_VIRTUAL_COPY
OOL descriptor is upgraded to a physical copy
.Pq Dv MACH_MSG_PHYSICAL_COPY
on send; true VM remap / COW share is not implemented.
.
.Ss Sending
.Fn mach_msg_send
enqueues a copy of the caller's buffer on the port named
.Va msg->msgh_remote
in
.Fa from .
Port-descriptor dispositions are honoured at this point: a
.Dv MOVE_SEND
removes the name from the sender, a
.Dv COPY_SEND
takes a fresh ref, etc.
OOL descriptors are captured into kernel-side staging buffers.
.Pp
Send is non-blocking when the destination has spare queue capacity, and
blocks the caller when the queue is full
.Pq up to Sy port_qmax No messages, default 1024 .
A blocked sender is woken when the queue drains.
.
.Ss Receiving
.Fn mach_msg_recv
dequeues one message from the port named
.Fa recv_name
in
.Fa to ,
copies it into
.Fa buf
.Pq capacity Fa buf_size ,
translates any port-descriptor names into the receiver's namespace,
and installs any OOL descriptors into the receiver's
.Xr vm_map 9 .
.Va recv_name
must carry the
.Dv RECEIVE
right.
.Pp
.Fa buf_size
must be at least 24
.Pq sizeof Vt mach_msg_header ;
short buffers cause the dequeue to fail with
.Er MACH_E_TOOSMALL
and the message is left in the queue.
.Pp
If the queue is empty,
.Fn mach_msg_recv
returns
.Er MACH_E_NOMSG
immediately;
.Fn mach_msg_recv_block
sleeps until a message arrives or the port dies;
.Fn mach_msg_recv_timed
sleeps up to
.Fa timeout_ms
milliseconds against
.Xr clock_uptime_ms 9 ,
returning
.Er MACH_E_TIMEOUT
on deadline.
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Dv MACH_TIMEOUT_NONE
non-blocking poll, identical to
.Fn mach_msg_recv .
.It Dv MACH_TIMEOUT_FOREVER
identical to
.Fn mach_msg_recv_block .
.El
.
.Ss RPC
.Fn mach_msg_rpc
combines send and recv with an ephemeral reply port.
A fresh port is created in
.Fa space ,
encoded into
.Va req->msgh_local
with disposition
.Dv MACH_MSG_TYPE_MAKE_SEND
so the server gets a send right to reply through, and torn down before
return regardless of outcome.
The caller's
.Va req->msgh_local
on entry is ignored: the reply port is wholly under
.Fn mach_msg_rpc Ns 's
control.
Any second reply from the server fails with
.Er MACH_E_DEAD
because the port is destroyed during the function's own cleanup.
The reply lands in
.Fa reply_buf
.Pq capacity Fa reply_buf_size ;
the wait is bounded by
.Fa timeout_ms
exactly as for
.Fn mach_msg_recv_timed .
.Pp
On any failure the reply port is deallocated before
.Fn mach_msg_rpc
returns, so the caller never has to clean up on the error path.
.Pp
.Sy Note :
the kernel preserves
.Dv MACH_MSGH_BITS_COMPLEX
on
.Va req->msgh_bits
through the send, so an RPC carrying OOL descriptors or port
descriptors continues to be treated as complex by the recv path.
.
.Ss Special ports
A port whose
.Va p_special
tag is non-zero is intercepted in the send path: instead of being
queued for a receiver thread to dequeue, the message is dispatched
synchronously in the sender's context.
There is no server thread, no queueing, and the dispatcher itself is
responsible for any reply via
.Va msgh_local .
.Bl -tag -width "PORT_SPECIAL_BOOTSTRAP"
.It Dv PORT_SPECIAL_NONE
Regular queue-and-receive port.
.It Dv PORT_SPECIAL_TASK_SELF
.Va p_special_arg
is a
.Vt "struct task *" ;
the dispatcher runs
.Fn task_self_dispatch
to satisfy
.Dv TASK_OP_*
queries against the target task.
.It Dv PORT_SPECIAL_BOOTSTRAP
The dispatcher consults the global service registry and replies with
a port descriptor carrying a fresh
.Dv COPY_SEND
to the matching service.
See
.Xr bootstrap 9 .
.It Dv PORT_SPECIAL_SERVICE
.Va p_special_arg
is a
.Vt port_service_fn
function pointer; the dispatcher invokes it with the request header and
the sender's port space, and propagates its return as the
.Fn mach_msg_send
result.
Used by
.Sy clock , Sy stats , Sy tasks , Sy klog , No and Sy echool
in
.Xr services 9 .
.El
.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
Per-port state
.Pq queue head/tail, ref counts
is protected by the port's own
.Vt struct spinlock .
Per-space state
.Pq name table
is protected by the space's spinlock.
Lock order: take the space lock outer, the port lock inner.
The send path acquires the destination port's lock to enqueue, the
recv path acquires it to dequeue; both run with IRQs disabled while
the lock is held.
.Pp
The receive blocker uses the deferred-wake protocol described in
.Xr sched 9
.Pq Fn thread_block_release ,
so a wake fired between the queue-empty check and the actual park is
not lost.
.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Functions returning
.Vt int
return
.Dv MACH_MSG_OK
.Pq 0
on success and a positive
.Dv MACH_E_*
code on failure.
.Fn port_allocate
and
.Fn port_set_allocate
return
.Dv MACH_PORT_NULL
.Pq 0
on failure.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
A trivial self-RPC against the task-self port:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct mach_msg_header   req;
struct {
    struct mach_msg_header  hdr;
    struct task_info_reply  body;
}                        reply;
int                      rv;

req.msgh_bits    = MACH_MSGH_BITS(MACH_MSG_TYPE_COPY_SEND, 0);
req.msgh_size    = sizeof(req);
req.msgh_remote  = MACH_PORT_TASK_SELF;
req.msgh_local   = 0;           /* overwritten by mach_msg_rpc       */
req.msgh_voucher = 0;
req.msgh_id     = TASK_OP_GET_INFO;

rv = mach_msg_rpc(self_space, &req, &reply.hdr, sizeof(reply),
        MACH_TIMEOUT_FOREVER);
if (rv == MACH_MSG_OK)
    kprintf("task id = %llu\\n", reply.body.tir_task_id);
.Ed
.Pp
A blocking-server idiom serving multiple ports through a single set:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mach_port_name_t  set  = port_set_allocate(space);
mach_port_name_t  p1   = port_allocate(space,
                            MACH_PORT_RIGHT_RECEIVE |
                            MACH_PORT_RIGHT_SEND);
mach_port_name_t  p2   = port_allocate(space,
                            MACH_PORT_RIGHT_RECEIVE |
                            MACH_PORT_RIGHT_SEND);

port_set_insert(space, set, p1);
port_set_insert(space, set, p2);

for (;;) {
    struct mach_msg_header *msg = ...;
    rv = mach_msg_recv_block(space, set, msg, BUFSZ);
    /* msg->msgh_local identifies the member port that delivered */
}
.Ed
.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width "MACH_E_TOOSMALL" -compact
.It Er MACH_E_INVAL
Argument out of range or shape, including malformed descriptors.
.It Er MACH_E_NAME
The supplied
.Vt mach_port_name_t
is not currently bound in the named space.
.It Er MACH_E_RIGHT
The name is bound but does not carry the right kind required for the
operation
.Pq e.g. Dv MOVE_SEND No on a name with only Dv RECEIVE .
.It Er MACH_E_DEAD
The port has been destroyed
.Pq last receive right dropped
since the sender's
.Dv SEND
right was created.
The receive-side counterpart is delivered by waking a parked receiver
with this code.
.It Er MACH_E_NOSPACE
The destination queue is full
.Pq Sy port_qmax No reached
or the port space table is full.
.It Er MACH_E_NOMSG
The port's queue is empty and the call is non-blocking.
.It Er MACH_E_TOOSMALL
.Fa buf_size
is smaller than the message head
.Pq Sy 24 No bytes
or smaller than the queued message; the queued message is left in
place.
.It Er MACH_E_NOMEM
A kernel-side
.Fn kmalloc
failed during message capture or descriptor staging.
.It Er MACH_E_TIMEOUT
The timed-receive deadline elapsed without a message arriving; the
caller's
.Fa buf
is untouched.
.El
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bootstrap 9 ,
.Xr klog 9 ,
.Xr sched 9 ,
.Xr services 9 ,
.Xr task 9 ,
.Xr vm 9
.
.Sh HISTORY
Mach IPC primitives appeared with the first style9-os kernel.
Out-of-line memory descriptors landed 2026-05-28 with the variable-
stride descriptor walker and the userspace
.Xr echool 9
oracle service.
.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An The style9-os project .
The wire format is taken verbatim from Mach.
