.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 The Hobby OS Project
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt VM_ALLOCATE 9
.Os style9-os
.
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_allocate ,
.Nm vm_deallocate
.Nd allocate and release anonymous user-VA ranges
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In style9.h
.Pp
.Ft void *
.Fn vm_allocate "size_t bytes" "uint32_t prot"
.Ft int
.Fn vm_deallocate "void *va" "size_t bytes"
.Pp
Kernel-internal helper that backs both:
.In vm.h
.Ft bool
.Fn vm_map_release "struct vm_map *map" "struct pmap *pm" "uint64_t va" "uint64_t size"
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn vm_allocate
requests a fresh range of user virtual address space, backs every page
with a newly allocated and zero-filled frame, installs the leaves into
the caller's per-task page table, and records the resulting extent in
the caller's
.Em vm_map .
The returned pointer is page-aligned; the range is mapped with the
permission bits in
.Fa prot
plus
.Dv VM_PROT_USER
implicitly.
.Pp
.Fa bytes
is rounded up to a multiple of 4 KiB before the search begins.
.Fa prot
is any bitwise-OR of
.Dv VM_PROT_READ ,
.Dv VM_PROT_WRITE ,
and
.Dv VM_PROT_EXEC ;
bits outside that set are silently masked out.
A
.Fa prot
of zero installs a present, read-only mapping
.Po
x86_64 has no
.Dq absent-but-mapped
bit; the most restrictive form is
.Dq read-only, no-execute
.Pc .
.Pp
.Fn vm_deallocate
releases a range previously returned by
.Fn vm_allocate :
each present page is unmapped from the per-task pmap, the backing
frame is returned to the page allocator, and the matching
.Em vm_map_entry
is removed.
.Pp
In v1 the
.Pq Fa va , Fa bytes
tuple must mirror a prior
.Fn vm_allocate
exactly --
.Fa va
must equal the entry's start and
.Fa bytes
must not exceed its extent.
Partial deallocate and ranges that span more than one entry are
rejected.
.Pp
.Fn vm_map_release
is the kernel-internal primitive that both
.Fn vm_deallocate
and the OOL
.Em deallocate
flag in
.Xr mach_msg 9
call.
The user-facing wrappers add their own argument validation
.Pq page-rounding, sign checks
on top.
.
.Sh INTERACTION WITH OOL DESCRIPTORS
A sender that wants the kernel to release its source buffer after an
OOL transfer sets
.Va deallocate
to
.Dv 1
on the
.Vt mach_msg_ool_descriptor
it ships.
.Xr mach_msg 9
calls
.Fn vm_map_release
on the sender's range post-copy, freeing the user from having to race
the send with a follow-up
.Fn vm_deallocate .
The flag is best-effort: if the source range does not mirror a single
.Fn vm_allocate Ns 'd
anonymous entry, the kernel silently skips the release rather than
returning an error from
.Fn mach_msg_send .
.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The user-VA window is
.Bq Dv VM_USER_VA_LO , Dv VM_USER_VA_HI
.Pq currently 1 GiB at 0x40000000 -- 0x80000000 .
.Em vm_map
allocates from this window via a forward-linear scan starting from
.Va vm_hint ;
the hint is bumped on every successful
.Fn vm_map_find_space
to spread allocations linearly rather than cluster them at the low
end.
.Pp
Frames come from the page allocator and are zeroed via the kernel
physmap before the user-side mapping is installed.
Once
.Fn pmap_enter
returns the page is observable from ring 3 as zero-filled.
.Pp
The strict
.Dq mirror an allocate
constraint on
.Fn vm_deallocate
exists because
.Fn vm_map_remove
in v1 only removes vm_map_entries that lie fully inside the request.
A future change will split entries at the requested edges so partial
deallocate
.Pq matching POSIX munmap
becomes well-defined; until then call sites stay symmetric.
.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn vm_allocate
returns a non-NULL pointer to the new range on success, or
.Dv NULL
on any failure.
.Pp
.Fn vm_deallocate
returns 0 on success, or a negative
.Dv SYS_E_*
code on failure.
.Pp
.Fn vm_map_release
returns
.Dv true
when the range matched and was released,
.Dv false
otherwise.
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Allocate, fill, ship via OOL with the deallocate flag set:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct {
	struct mach_msg_header		hdr;
	struct mach_msg_body		body;
	struct mach_msg_ool_descriptor	ool;
} req;
char *buf;

buf = vm_allocate(4096, VM_PROT_READ | VM_PROT_WRITE);
if (buf == NULL)
	return -1;
memset(buf, 'A', 4096);

req.hdr.msgh_bits	= MACH_MSGH_BITS(MACH_MSG_TYPE_COPY_SEND, 0) |
    MACH_MSGH_BITS_COMPLEX;
req.hdr.msgh_size	= sizeof(req);
req.hdr.msgh_remote	= server_port;
req.hdr.msgh_local	= MACH_PORT_NULL;
req.hdr.msgh_voucher	= 0;
req.hdr.msgh_id		= OP_INGEST;
req.body.msgh_descriptor_count = 1;
req.ool.type		= MACH_MSG_OOL_DESCRIPTOR;
req.ool.copy		= MACH_MSG_PHYSICAL_COPY;
req.ool.deallocate	= 1;
req.ool.size		= 4096;
req.ool.address		= (uint64_t)(uintptr_t)buf;

(void)mach_msg_send(&req.hdr);
/* buf is gone -- do NOT touch it again. */
.Ed
.Pp
Plain allocate / release:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
void *p = vm_allocate(8192, VM_PROT_READ | VM_PROT_WRITE);
if (p == NULL)
	return -1;
/* ... use *p ... */
(void)vm_deallocate(p, 8192);
.Ed
.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn vm_allocate
returns
.Dv NULL
when:
.Bl -tag -width "SYS_E_NOMEM"
.It Dv SYS_E_INVAL
.Fa bytes
is zero.
.It Dv SYS_E_NOMEM
the
.Em vm_map
has no hole large enough, or the page allocator is out of frames.
The kernel rolls back any pages mapped before the failure so a
partial allocation never leaks.
.El
.Pp
.Fn vm_deallocate
returns:
.Bl -tag -width "SYS_E_INVAL"
.It Dv SYS_E_INVAL
.Fa va
is not page-aligned,
.Fa bytes
is zero, or
.Pq Fa va , Fa bytes
does not mirror a known anonymous
.Em vm_map_entry .
.El
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mach_msg 9 ,
.Xr port 9
.
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn vm_allocate
and
.Fn vm_deallocate
landed in
.Nm style9-os
on May 28, 2026.
The OOL
.Em deallocate
flag wiring landed alongside.
.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.An The style9-os project .
